# How to install a tile server

---
### Prepare Machine
- Prepare a machine of at least:
    - 8GB memory
    - 1TB disk
    - 8 CPU threads
- Install Ubuntu 64 bit server (version >= 14)

### Optimize PostgreSQL
- Recommended postgresql db settings for loading data:
    - fsync=off
    - synchronous_commit=off
    - full_page_writes=off
    - effective_cache_size=6GB
    - work_mem=10MB
    - maintenance_work_mem=6GB
    - autovacuum = off
    - shared_buffers = 1GB
- Recommended postgresql db settings for serving tiles :
    - fsync=off
    - synchronous_commit=off
    - full_page_writes=off
    - effective_cache_size=6GB
    - work_mem=10MB
    - maintenance_work_mem=2GB
    - autovacuum = off
    - shared_buffers = 2GB

### Install a basic tile serving system
- Follow this tutorial: https://switch2osm.org/serving-tiles/manually-building-a-tile-server-14-04/
- After you finish this tutorial, you shall have a very basic tile serving system which can serve tiles with fixed layers.
- Check md5 of the osm data you downloaded. Do not download planet data from ftp.spline.de because the md5 always change which indicates the downloaded data is not consistent.
- kernel.shmmax / shared_buff / maintenance_work_mem can be greater than stated in the tutorial. default(very large)/1GB/2GB is fine.
- The osm2pgsql mentioned in this tutorial will only be used as a tutorial purpose. imposm will be used in the real production environment because it has a much better database schema. 
- So, importing a small dataset (like florida) with osm2pgsql into the database is recommended. Because we will switch to imposm anyway.
- Tips for loading data into database    
    - When -C parameter of osm2pgsql is small, the loading will be extremely slow. If you don't have lots of memory on your server, create another machine just for loading purpose.
    - Recommended loading command for local machine: `osm2pgsql -c --slim --drop -d gis --flat-nodes flat.nodes -C ? --number-processes 4 planet-latest.osm.pbf`
    - Recommended loading command for remote machine: `osm2pgsql -H ? -U ? -W -c --slim --drop -d gis --flat-nodes flat.nodes -C ? --number-processes 4 planet-latest.osm.pbf`

### Install customized tile serving system
- The system is customized heavily to enable:
	- Serving tiles with dynamic layers
	- Switch from osm2pgsql to imposm because imposm has a better data schema which serves planet osm data much faster.
	- Some performance tunings.
- Prepare: use imposm to import osm data
	- Follow this document: http://imposm.org/docs/imposm/latest/
	- The version I used was imposm 2.6 because imposm 3 was not ready by the time I wrote this document.
	- Try a small dataset first. Load planet data later.
	- Use the mapping file from https://github.com/mapbox/osm-bright for loading because osm-bright use a database schema slightly different than imposm default schema.
	- After import is done, run the script `imposm.fix_srid.sql` on the database. This is a patch to fix the problem that generalized tables do not have geometry srid set for the geometry column. This can cause extremely slow start up of the renderd.
	- Run script `imposm.optimize.sql`
- First, create the following dirs:
	- `/tileservice` : everything is in this one single directory
	- `/tileservice/cache` : cached metatiles are stored here
	- `/tileservice/src` : store source codes of projects which are customized, like mod_tile and osm-bright
	- `/tileservice/data` : store shapefiles which are used by some stylesets but not in the database.
	- `/tileservice/run` : store styles, configurations and scripts for running
	- `/tileservice/run/fonts` : font files used by mapnik
- Then:
	- `chmod a+w /tileservice/cache`
	- copy `tfs://project_path/src` to `/tileservice/src`
	- copy `tfs://project_path/scripts/run` to `/tileservice/run`
	- copy `tfs://project_path/data/fonts` to `/tileservice/run/fonts`
	- Edit `/etc/apache2/sites-available/000-default.conf`, change `LoadTileConfigFile=/tileservice/run/renderd.conf`
	- Download `http://data.openstreetmapdata.com/simplified-land-polygons-complete-3857.zip` and `http://data.openstreetmapdata.com/land-polygons-split-3857.zip` and extract to `/tileservice/data/shp`
- Compile:
	- `/tileservice/src/mod_tile/make-install.sh`
	- `/tileservice/src/styleset_map/install.sh`
	- `/tileservice/src/styleset_hybrid/install.sh`

### Customize mod_tile settings
- Edit `/etc/apache2/sites-available/000-default.conf`
	- ModTileEnableTileThrottling Off
	- ModTileRequestTimeout 0
	- ModTileMissingRequestTimeout 60

### Setting it to run automatically
- `sudo cp /tileservice/src/mod_tile/debian/renderd.init /etc/init.d/renderd`
- `sudo chmod u+x /etc/init.d/renderd`
- Edit /etc/init.d/renderd and make the following changes
    - DAEMON=/usr/local/bin/$NAME
    - DAEMON_ARGS="-c /tileservice/run/renderd.conf"
    - RUNASUSER=mapnik
- `sudo ln -s /etc/init.d/renderd /etc/rc2.d/S20renderd`
- location of the log file: /var/log/syslog
- Start and stop renderd service: `sudo service renderd start` or `sudo service renderd stop`